one acute rewording request, one milder one, and short elaboration on refactoring (#244)
CaptainSifff/paper_teaching-learning-RSE: competencies.md

more experienced staff at their institutions. A gap still exists in
academic education, as many curricula do not sufficiently prepare their students
in this regard. This situation is exemplified by the extracurricular \ac{MIT} class
"The Missing Semester of Your CS Education" [@MIT], which aims to convey basic

> programming environment literacy skills even to students of Computer Science at \ac{MIT}.

Reviewer: The term `computing ecosystem literacy` comes directly from the [cited resource](https://missing.csail.mit.edu/about/), so I think it should remain like this independently of whether we like it or not. Maybe we can put it in quotation marks.

This sentence was introduced by @CaptainSifff in https://github.com/CaptainSifff/paper_teaching-learning-RSE/pull/114/commits/6f1107f742bb7a3d7408aba5339e7e170d754ea2

established research culture, and the commitment to being part of a team.
While there is anecdotal evidence that academic SE practitioners
would have chosen different competencies, we will argue that this trifecta of skills

> is exactly what is needed for modern digitally enhanced research.

Reviewer: I don't really like either term, but I guess "digitally-enhanced research" is better than "digital research".

There are multiple instances of this term.

This sentence was introduced by @CaptainSifff in https://github.com/CaptainSifff/paper_teaching-learning-RSE/commit/54441366667ec72a5254fdcd8159042ba0aff7d8.

Reviewer 2: How about 'modern research methods'?
This would not discredit any modern research topics being worked on by traditional methods
but would emcompass what we want to say.

Reviewer 3: I don't have a problem with the original "modern digital research", maybe add "methods" as @jpthiele suggests. It makes it clear what we are talking about. "enhanced" implies to me a value. In many instances the digital methods enable the research in the first place.

Author: there is not such thing as "digital research", be it ancient or modern

Reviewer 4: My view on this is, you have a problem. Most problems you can approach analytically, experimentally or digitally/numerically (or a combination of those). These I would call _methods_ or _approaches_, e.g. "digital research approach".

_Research field_ to my is something like engineering (or more specific, e.g. fluid dynamics).

Author: @mschwarzmeier in this last comment of yours I'd ask you: in "digital research approach", is the "digital" an attribute of "research" or of "approach"?

If it's of "research", then it should be substitutable to "analog", and "analog research" does not seem meaningful. 

If it's of "approach" I'd say much better, because "digital approach" is a shorthand for "approach employing digital (i.e. discrete, not analog) techniques".

What about substituting "is exactly what is needed for modern digital research" with "is exactly what is needed for modern, digitally assisted research",  @mschwarzmeier @mhagdorn @MakisH ?

Reviewer 3: > There is not such thing as "digital research", be it ancient or modern. Many research fields exist. In some of those, digital technology is an object (e.g. computing machinery). In many of them, digital tools (that is, tools based on digital computing, as opposed to analog computing) are employed. But still, no such thing as "digital research", sorry. @mhagdorn .

yes, that's why I suggested digital research methods

Reviewer 4: @michelemartone German is  clearer on  this: it would be "digitaler Forschungsansatz". digital refers to the approach.

Methods or approach: I don't have a strong preference. In this context I would like methods actually a bit better.

Reviewer 4: "is exactly what is needed for modern, digitally assisted research" - fine with me
"is exactly what is needed for (modern,) digital research methods" - fine with me

Reviewer 3: > @mschwarzmeier in this last comment of yours I'd ask you: in "digital research approach", is the "digital" an attribute of "research" or of "approach"?
> 
> If it's of "research", then it should be substitutable to "analog", and "analog research" does not seem meaningful.
> 
> If it's of "approach" I'd say much better, because "digital approach" is a shorthand for "approach employing digital (i.e. discrete, not analog) techniques".
> 
> What about substituting "is exactly what is needed for modern digital research" with "is exactly what is needed for modern, digitally assisted research", @mschwarzmeier @mhagdorn @MakisH ?

In this case "digital" relates to something that can be processed by computers. TBH I haven't thought about how research that doesn't involve digital systems should be called. I guess that's where the term traditional research methods come in. I think "assisted" is not strong enough. Digital research methods can 
* be "assisted", when you analyse measurements with a computer - you could theoretically do this by hand as it was done in the pre-digital era
* make it cheaper, you could do fluid dynamics using wave tanks, scale models, etc. You should get the same results but it is a lot more difficult/expensive.
* make it possible, you couldn't do climate models without computers. If I remember correctly the first climate model was done by hand
* be totally different, RSEs are involved in art projects that do something weird and wonderful

Digital research methods are transformative. That's why we are arguing we need people who understand and manage these systems. We need a term that describes these new computer or digital systems based research methods.

Reviewer: I see the point: we may be doing research on simulations, new AI models etc, which is fully digital. We may also be doing classical chemistry lab research, which then needs streamlined and reproducible collection, post-processing, and publication of data (which would be digitally-enhanced).

I think both categories are `modern, software-enabled research`. They would either not be possible at all, or be not the same without software.

I am just a bit skeptic of the term "digital" as it is generic and could mean anything (e.g., reading papers online instead of in print). Our emphasis is on software in the core (or very near the core) of research.

Reviewer: I just stumbled upon the term `software-enabled research` in the [description of the de-RSE logo](https://github.com/DE-RSE/logo-association?tab=readme-ov-file#specifications):

> The logo plays on the nature of RSE as an intersection of software-enabled research and software engineering.

> is exactly what is needed for modern digitally enhanced research.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is exactly what is needed for modern, software-enabled research.
```

Reviewer 5: So, for the sake of having a decision and sth. to move on, I went with software-enabled research. I'd like to emphasize that the restriction to software in my opinion is a bit to strict. Research becomes different through the availability o fa variety of electronic tools. Community Managers in our sense would not exist in the 1970s, teachers wouldn't have to think about MOOCs.

**Research software engineers**: People who
create or improve research software and/or the structures that the software interacts with

> in the computational environment of a research domain.

Reviewer: This is fine. Independently of the arguments regarding "ecosystem", I think that "computational environment" fits better in this case.

This sentence was introduced by @CaptainSifff in https://github.com/CaptainSifff/paper_teaching-learning-RSE/pull/114/commits/6f1107f742bb7a3d7408aba5339e7e170d754ea2

Reviewer 3: I think I prefer "ecosystem", since you could have different computational environments in the same research domain. These would make up the ecosystem that ties the different environments together.

Author: @mhagdorn Would

"People who not only create and improve research software, but also organize the environment (organizational as well as computational) for the software tools to serve a specific research domain."

convey what matters most here? This formulation is is even shorter than the original one.

Reviewer: > I think I prefer "ecosystem", since you could have different computational environments in the same research domain. These would make up the ecosystem that ties the different environments together.

Reading it again, and hearing all arguments, I also prefer the original "computational ecosystem of a research domain". Computational environment is indeed used as something very specific and static.

> Would
> 
> "People who not only create and improve research software, but also organize the environment (organizational as well as computational) for the software tools to serve a specific research domain."
> 
> convey what matters most here? This formulation is is even shorter than the original one.

No, I think this is convoluting and/or changing the original message.

Since this is a definition, can we just cite some reference? I thought we already had one here.

Reviewer 5: the reference here would point to Gruenpeter, I guess.

Reviewer 5: I think I'm also slightly biased to my original definition. In a lot of uses, it has proven succinct enough.

Reviewer 5: A german alternative would be

> Die Rolle des RSE - sowohl als Alleinentwickler als auch im Entwicklungsteam - wendet den Stand der Praxis des Software Engineerings auf die Entwicklung von Forschungssoftware an und adaptiert diese hinsichtlich derer speziellen Anforderungen. Bei steigender Anwendungsklasse der Forschungssoftware ist ein größerer Umfang von Software Engineering Techniken und Methoden anzuwenden. Forscher, die Forschungssoftware entwickeln, sollen perspektivisch die Anforderungen der Rolle RSE erfüllen.
> Weitere Rollen im Kontext von Forschungssoftware sind z.B. Manager, Supportteams wie Rechtsabteilungen, die RSE hinsichtlich der Leitlinien unterstützen müssen

Which in my opinion is a tad too convoluted...

Author: I see no obvious link between this full definition you stated here in German and "computational ecosystem".
Perhaps you just wrote that glossary section definition which somebody (:innocent: ) had to prepare in order to have a more conservative use, if at all, of the term "ecosystem" in the paper?

needs to be spent on maintenance to ensure that software remains useful or even installable.
With regard to which additional competency is required,
these are people having experience with software stacks that are not part of the general curricula any more (e.g., \gls{COBOL} or \gls{Fortran}).

> Adaption of existing, large-scale codebases to evolving dependencies (\gls{LIBS}) or changing hardware (\ac{HPC}; see the HPC-RSE point below) may require mastery of in refactoring techniques and in the usage of specialized code transformation tools.

Reviewer: This part was rewritten in #222, which has now been merged. Let's rebase and reconsider if the changes are still needed.

structures and ideas for educating newcomers to this field.
One outcome of this diverse gathering is that RSEs from far away fields gather
around similar core concepts, and at the same time share a vision of how to

> renew scientific research practice making proper use of digital tools.

Reviewer 5: Good!

- \ac{SE} skills:
  - Foundational module: Here we have an introduction to programming: Students learn at least two languages: a language that facilitates prototyping and data processing (e.g., \gls{Python} or \gls{R}) and a language for designing complex, performance-critical systems (e.g., \gls{C}/\gls{Cpp}). This exposes them to computers in a hands-on fashion and is the foundation for (\gls{DOCBB}, \gls{LIBS}).

>   - Computing environment module: Programming languages are not enough to work in a landscape of many interconnected software components (sometimes incorrectly called 'ecosystem'); hence we require something like software craftsmanship, where tools such as the Unix shell, version control systems, build systems, documentation generators, package distribution platforms, and software discovery systems are taught to strengthen skills in (\gls{LIBS}, \gls{DOCBB}, \gls{SWREPOS}, \gls{SRU}).

Reviewer: I don't think we should challenge the established terminology here, this is not the aim of this paper.

```suggestion
  - Computing environment module: Programming languages are not enough to work in a landscape of many interconnected software components; hence we require something like software craftsmanship, where tools such as the Unix shell, version control systems, build systems, documentation generators, package distribution platforms, and software discovery systems are taught to strengthen skills in (\gls{LIBS}, \gls{DOCBB}, \gls{SWREPOS}, \gls{SRU}).
```
